EC2 recommendations (#396)
harness/developer-hub: docs/cloud-cost-management/2-use-cloud-cost-management/7-ccm-recommendations/ec2-recommendations.md

---
title: Optimize AWS EC2 costs with recommendations
description: View the CCM recommendations
# sidebar_position: 2
---

> An effective way to reduce the costs of your AWS EC2 instances is to make sure the VMs are optimally utilized by resizing the instances based on the tasks running on that instance and decommissioning the ones not used for an extended period.
> 
> You can view the recommendations for all of your AWS accounts on the recommendations page. 
> 
> You can also tune the recommendations displayed depending on the instance family you want to use. It could either be within the same instance family or across instance families.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An effective way to reduce AWS EC2 instance costs is to optimize VM utilization. This involves resizing instances based on active tasks and decommissioning unused instances.

Harness helps you reduce costs with recommendations.

You can view the recommendations for all of your AWS accounts on the recommendations page. 

You can also tune these recommendations by instance family or across instance families (General Purpose, Compute Optimized, etc.).
```

:::note
Before using recommendations in your environment, ensure that you evaluate their impact thoroughly. The person reviewing the recommendations should be able to understand the impacts identified in the recommendations, as well as the impact on the infrastructure and business.

Using recommendations without proper assessment could result in unexpected changes, such as issues with system performance or poor reliability.
:::

## Before you begin

> * Sign up for your AWS cloud account and set up CCM for cost management. For more information, go to  [Set up cost visibility for AWS](https://developer.harness.io/docs/cloud-cost-management/onboard-with-cloud-cost-management/set-up-cloud-cost-management/set-up-cost-visibility-for-aws).
> * To obtain EC2 recommendations, configure an AWS CCM Connector with the Inventory Management feature enabled.
> * Go to [Perspectives](https://developer.harness.io/docs/cloud-cost-management/use-cloud-cost-management/ccm-perspectives/create-cost-perspectives) to learn how to create perspectives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Connect your AWS cloud account in Harness and set up CCM for cost management. For more information, go to  [Set up cost visibility for AWS](https://developer.harness.io/docs/cloud-cost-management/onboard-with-cloud-cost-management/set-up-cloud-cost-management/set-up-cost-visibility-for-aws).
* To obtain EC2 recommendations, configure a Harness AWS CCM connector with the Inventory Management feature enabled.
* Go to [Perspectives](https://developer.harness.io/docs/cloud-cost-management/use-cloud-cost-management/ccm-perspectives/create-cost-perspectives) to learn how to create perspectives. Perspectives allow you to group your resources in ways that are more meaningful to your business needs.
```

Reviewer: For "To obtain EC2 recommendations, configure an AWS CCM Connector with the Inventory Management feature enabled.", where do they go to do this? 

Is it part of the Set up cost visibility for AWS topic? If so, maybe indent the ""To obtain EC2 recommendations, configure an AWS CCM Connector..." bullet under the first bullet.

## How are EC2 recommendations computed?

The recommendations are computed by analyzing the past utilization of the CPU and memory of your EC2 instance. Harness CCM leverages the AWS EC2 recommendations. CCM uses the AWS APIs and fetches the data from the AWS account.

### Types of EC2 recommendations

Harness CCM provides two types of recommendations to optimize your EC2 instances:

> * **Instance resizing**: In this type of recommendation, CCM recommends resizing your instance within the same instance family or a different instance family based on its usage. For information about the different instance families in AWS, go to [Available instance types](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/WindowsGuide/instance-types.html#AvailableInstanceTypes). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Instance resizing**: In this type of recommendation, CCM recommends resizing your instance within the same instance family or using a different instance family based on instance usage. For information about the different instance families in AWS, go to [Available instance types](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/WindowsGuide/instance-types.html#AvailableInstanceTypes). 
```

 

![](./static/ec2-recommendations-1.png)

* **Decommissioning**: In this type of recommendation, the instance is terminated or decommissioned if not in use for a long time.
 

![](./static/ec2-recom-decommission.png)

## Enable EC2 Recommendations

> :::note
> If you are an existing customer, you need to:
> * Edit the IAM Role in the AWS Connector corresponding to the account.
> * Add _ce:GetRightsizingRecommendation_ permission to the **HarnessEventsMonitoringPolicy**.
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note
If you are a new Harness user, you need to edit the IAM role used by the Harness AWS Connector corresponding to the AWS account.

In the IAM role, add the `ce:GetRightsizingRecommendation` permission to the **HarnessEventsMonitoringPolicy**.
:::
```

> You need to perform the following tasks on your AWS console to enable these recommendations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have the `ce:GetRightsizingRecommendation` permission added to the **HarnessEventsMonitoringPolicy** in the IAM role, perform the following tasks on your AWS console to enable recommendations.
```

1. On your AWS console, go to the **Cost Explorer** service.

  ![](./static/ec2-recom-aws-screen-1.png)
  

2. Click **Preferences** on the left pane.
3. Enable the following recommendations:
 * Receive Amazon EC2 resource recommendations 
 * Recommendations for linked accounts
  
    ![](./static/ec2-recom-aws-screen-2.png)

4. Verify that you have enabled these recommendations correctly. 

  Open AWS CloudShell and run the following command: 

```
  aws ce get-rightsizing-recommendation --service AmazonEC2
```
 
 If the recommendations are not enabled, the following error message is displayed:

     
  "An error occurred (AccessDeniedException) when calling the GetRightsizingRecommendation operation: Rightsizing EC2 recommendation is an opt-in only feature. You can enable this feature from the PAYER account’s Cost Explorer Preferences page. Normally it may take up to 24 hours in order to generate your rightsizing recommendations."

5. You must install the Amazon CloudWatch agent on your EC2 instance to enable memory metrics.

You need to perform the following steps in Harness:

> 1. While creating a new AWS connector, select the **Inventory Management** feature to enable the recommendations. For more information, go to [Set up CCM for your AWS account.](https://developer.harness.io/docs/cloud-cost-management/onboard-with-cloud-cost-management/set-up-cloud-cost-management/set-up-cost-visibility-for-aws#choose-requirements)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. While creating a new AWS CCM connector, select the **Inventory Management** feature to enable recommendations. For more information, go to [Set up CCM for your AWS account.](https://developer.harness.io/docs/cloud-cost-management/onboard-with-cloud-cost-management/set-up-cloud-cost-management/set-up-cost-visibility-for-aws#choose-requirements)
```

> 2. Add the required **Cost Explorer** permissions to the CCM template as shown in the screenshot below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Add the required **Cost Explorer** permissions to the CCM template:
```

    ![](./static/ec2-create-cross-account-role.png)

  

### View your EC2 recommendations

> 1. In the **Harness** application, go to **Cloud Costs**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the **Harness**, go to the **Cloud Costs** module.
```
